Session on workflow sizing (#34)
lailabougria/talks: microservices-tetris-workflow-sizing/README.md

> # Fitting microservices into workflows like Tetris

Reviewer: I wonder if the analogy of an orchestra would work better. For example you could say that while an orchestra can have the best music players in the world overall the music experience happens when those individual music players create an experience by playing together.

I played around with this idea in GPT and I think I like where this is going better

In a microservice reality, individual components are like virtuoso musicians—each excellent in their own right, but delivering limited value in isolation. The real magic happens when they play in harmony, contributing to a larger composition. In these systems, workflows are the orchestration: they bring multiple services into a shared performance that fulfills critical business processes.

But just as in music, the arrangement matters. How do you define the scope of a single workflow? How does the size and complexity of that workflow relate to the boundaries of each microservice? How do choices in coordination—whether synchronous, asynchronous, or choreographed—affect the overall sound? And how do you keep the full musical score in mind when each player is focused on their own notes?

Designing the right “arrangement” requires deep contextual understanding. You’re often dealing with multiple overlapping contexts, and many factors—scope, visibility, governance, coordination mechanisms—will influence your choices. In this session, we’ll explore workflows from multiple angles, zooming in and out, tuning our perspective like a conductor rehearsing with the ensemble. You’ll leave with a broader set of compositional tools to shape your systems, creating elegant solutions that are not only functional—but perform beautifully.

## Abstract

> In a microservice reality, components are small and focused but don’t provide much value in isolation. In these systems, workflows are where the magic happens: they string together multiple services to participate in a larger conversation that fulfills critical business processes. But how we view and scope these workflows matters. How do you define the scope of a single workflow? How does the workflow size relate to service boundaries? How does the scope affect decisions about coordination mechanisms? And how do you keep a larger overview when you decide to split things apart for the sake of loose coupling? 

Reviewer 2: thought: maybe the abstract could mention something about the impact of poorly designed workflows onto the system and why the scoping is so important.

Author: This is a good idea, I need to think about how to incorporate this somehow.

> In a microservice reality, components are small and focused but don’t provide much value in isolation. In these systems, workflows are where the magic happens: they string together multiple services to participate in a larger conversation that fulfills critical business processes. But how we view and scope these workflows matters. How do you define the scope of a single workflow? How does the workflow size relate to service boundaries? How does the scope affect decisions about coordination mechanisms? And how do you keep a larger overview when you decide to split things apart for the sake of loose coupling? 

Author: Yes that's out of scope for this talk, although it may come up here or there I wouldn't want to make it part of the abstract

> In a microservice reality, components are small and focused but don’t provide much value in isolation. In these systems, workflows are where the magic happens: they string together multiple services to participate in a larger conversation that fulfills critical business processes. But how we view and scope these workflows matters. How do you define the scope of a single workflow? How does the workflow size relate to service boundaries? How does the scope affect decisions about coordination mechanisms? And how do you keep a larger overview when you decide to split things apart for the sake of loose coupling? 

Author: Given the context of "a microservice reality" and this sentence: "they string together multiple services to participate in a larger conversation that fulfills **critical business processes**." Do you still think there's room for such a misunderstanding to occur?

> In a microservice reality, components are small and focused but don’t provide much value in isolation. In these systems, workflows are where the magic happens: they string together multiple services to participate in a larger conversation that fulfills critical business processes. But how we view and scope these workflows matters. How do you define the scope of a single workflow? How does the workflow size relate to service boundaries? How does the scope affect decisions about coordination mechanisms? And how do you keep a larger overview when you decide to split things apart for the sake of loose coupling? 

Reviewer 3: I think there might still be room for misunderstanding... Workflow for me still has a .NET 3 windows workflow foundation meaning.  I'm not sure what would be better though

> Appropriately sizing workflows requires a deep understanding of the context, realizing you have different contexts to consider. There are plenty of aspects that will significantly impact the design of your workflows: from scope, complexity, coordination, visibility, to governance. In this session, we’ll take a varied look at workflows, zooming in, zooming back out, and repeating the process –all over again. You’ll walk away with a diverse set of lenses to focus differently on workflows depending on the problem you’re trying to address, enabling you to choose appropriate designs that achieve your goals.

Author: Goot catch, this is not a nitpick, bothers me too now that I read it!

> Appropriately sizing workflows requires a deep understanding of the context, realizing you have different contexts to consider. There are plenty of aspects that will significantly impact the design of your workflows: from scope, complexity, coordination, visibility, to governance. In this session, we’ll take a varied look at workflows, zooming in, zooming back out, and repeating the process –all over again. You’ll walk away with a diverse set of lenses to focus differently on workflows depending on the problem you’re trying to address, enabling you to choose appropriate designs that achieve your goals.

Author: ```suggestion
Appropriately sizing workflows requires a deep understanding of the different contexts in which the workflow impacts the entire system. There are plenty of aspects that will significantly impact the design of your workflows: from scope, complexity, coordination, visibility, to governance. In this session, we’ll take a varied look at workflows, zooming in, zooming back out, and repeating the process –all over again. You’ll walk away with a diverse set of lenses to focus differently on workflows depending on the problem you’re trying to address, enabling you to choose appropriate designs that achieve your goals.
```
